README.md, before:

# WarcDB: Web crawl data as SQLite databases.

`WarcDB` is a an `SQLite`-based file format that makes web crawl data easier to share and query.

## Motivation

From the `WARC` [formal specification](https://iipc.github.io/warc-specifications/specifications/warc-format/warc-1.1/):

> The WARC (Web ARChive) file format offers a convention for concatenating multiple resource records (data objects),
> each consisting of a set of simple text headers and an arbitrary data block into one long file.

Many organizations such as Commoncrawl, WebRecorder, Archive.org and libraries around the world, use the `warc` format
to archive and store web data.

The full datasets of these services range in the few pebibytes(PiB),
making them impractical to query using non-distributed systems.

This project aims to make **subsets** of this data easier to access and query using SQL.

## Examples

Currently, this is implemented on top of SQLite and is a wrapper around the
excellent [SQLite-Utils](https://sqlite-utils.datasette.io/en/stable/) utility.

"`wrapper`" means that all
existing `sqlite-utils` [CLI commands](https://sqlite-utils.datasette.io/en/stable/cli-reference.html)
can be call as expected as `sqlite-utils <command> example.warcdb` or `warcdb <command> example.warcdb` but the latter
has been decorated with additional `.warc`-specific commands and flags.

It is recommended to use the `warcdb` version as this will maintain integrity of the `.warcdb` between internal schema
changes.

## Schema

Here's the relational schema of the `.warcdb` file.

![WarcDB Schema](schema.png)


### Multiple `.warc[gz]` files into a `.warcdb`

```shell
warcdb import ./example.warcdb ./tests/example.warc ./tests/example.warc.gz --batch-size 10000
```

### Pipe `wget -x` to `.warcdb`

### Query with SQL

```shell
sqlite-utils example.warcdb "select 'WARC-Date', http_headers from records where 'Content-Length' > 1000 limit 10" | jq
```

### Full-Text Search

### Streaming from remote archives

Here's an interesting example:

Fetch a remote compressed archive,
decompressed on-the-fly,
create an in-memory `.warcdb` SQLite database,
and run the query on top of it.

```shell
wget -O - "https://data.commoncrawl.org/crawl-data/CC-MAIN-2022-05/segments/1642320299852.23/warc/CC-MAIN-20220116093137-20220116123137-00000.warc.gz"  |\
 gzip -d
```

### Concat multiple `.warcdb`

TODO: use  `ATTACH`


Resources on WARC
----------------

* [The stack: An introduction to the WARC file](https://archive-it.org/blog/post/the-stack-warc-file/)

Commit message:

Add How it Works section

README.md, after:

# WarcDB: Web crawl data as SQLite databases.

`WarcDB` is a an `SQLite`-based file format that makes web crawl data easier to share and query.

## Motivation

From the `WARC` [formal specification](https://iipc.github.io/warc-specifications/specifications/warc-format/warc-1.1/):

> The WARC (Web ARChive) file format offers a convention for concatenating multiple resource records (data objects),
> each consisting of a set of simple text headers and an arbitrary data block into one long file.

Many organizations such as Commoncrawl, WebRecorder, Archive.org and libraries around the world, use the `warc` format
to archive and store web data.

The full datasets of these services range in the few pebibytes(PiB),
making them impractical to query using non-distributed systems.

This project aims to make **subsets** of this data easier to access and query using SQL.

## Examples

Currently, this is implemented on top of SQLite and is a wrapper around the
excellent [SQLite-Utils](https://sqlite-utils.datasette.io/en/stable/) utility.

"`wrapper`" means that all
existing `sqlite-utils` [CLI commands](https://sqlite-utils.datasette.io/en/stable/cli-reference.html)
can be call as expected as `sqlite-utils <command> example.warcdb` or `warcdb <command> example.warcdb` but the latter
has been decorated with additional `.warc`-specific commands and flags.

It is recommended to use the `warcdb` version as this will maintain integrity of the `.warcdb` between internal schema
changes.

## How It Works

Individual `.warc` files are read and parsed and their data is inserted into an SQLite database with the relational schema seen below.

## Schema

Here's the relational schema of the `.warcdb` file.

![WarcDB Schema](schema.png)


### Multiple `.warc[gz]` files into a `.warcdb`

```shell
warcdb import ./example.warcdb ./tests/example.warc ./tests/example.warc.gz --batch-size 10000
```

### Pipe `wget -x` to `.warcdb`

### Query with SQL

```shell
sqlite-utils example.warcdb "select 'WARC-Date', http_headers from records where 'Content-Length' > 1000 limit 10" | jq
```

### Full-Text Search

### Streaming from remote archives

Here's an interesting example:

Fetch a remote compressed archive,
decompressed on-the-fly,
create an in-memory `.warcdb` SQLite database,
and run the query on top of it.

```shell
wget -O - "https://data.commoncrawl.org/crawl-data/CC-MAIN-2022-05/segments/1642320299852.23/warc/CC-MAIN-20220116093137-20220116123137-00000.warc.gz"  |\
 gzip -d
```

### Concat multiple `.warcdb`

TODO: use  `ATTACH`


Resources on WARC
----------------

* [The stack: An introduction to the WARC file](https://archive-it.org/blog/post/the-stack-warc-file/)
